Grandma Dennis Strudel

Makes 3 small strudels in 9 inch pans.  

3.5 cups of white flour – prefer King Arthur Organic – fluffed, not packed 
1 Teaspoon of salt
1/2 cup of white sugar
1/4 cup butter melted
1 whole egg
2 egg yolks
3/4 cup of warm whole milk

1 pkg dry yeast – Red Star regular rise – can use quick rise if you must
1/3 cup of lukewarm water
1 teaspoon of sugar

Add the 1 teaspoon of sugar to the 1/3 cup of lukewarm water and add yeast to proof. Proofing will make sure the yeast isn’t dead.  You’ll see bubble of yeast and foaming after about five minutes.  When the yeast has proofed go to the next step.

Put the 3.5 cups of flour in a bowl.  Make a well in the center.  Pour in the proofed yeast. Stir slightly and cover with flour.  Let sit :30 minutes.  

After :30 minutes add the whole egg, the yolks, the sugar, salt, whole milk and melted butter
MAKE SURE THE MILK AND THE BUTTER ARE NOT HOT LEST THEY COOK THE EGGS! 

Mix with a wooden spoon.  Then turn out on to a bread board.  The dough will be sticky.  Butter or oil your hands and knead for 5 to 7 minutes until the dough is smooth and elastic. You will need to add flour to make the dough manageable.  Depending on humidity, liquids and accuracy of measurement it could be a ½ cuo or more of flour.  When the dough is smooth and elastic let the dough rise until doubled in bulk. This could take anywhere from one to two hours.  

Once the dough has risen cut it into three equal parts – the original recipe claims it would make four small strudels.  It can be done but the strudels will smaller and have less bread to filling ratio.

Butter the strudel pans generously.  

Roll dough out into a rectangle the width of the pan and as long as you can make it.  The thickness would be an 1/8th to 3/16ths of an inch.  

Add the filling.  Poppy seed – Solo Brand poppy seeds.  About a half to ¾ of a can per strudel depending on spread thickness. Empty from can and microwave for 30 to 40 seconds to aid spread ability.  Roll up up carefully and place seam side down in a pan.  

Walnut -  Toast walnuts in a pan over medium heat and coarsely grind using a mill or food processor.  Melt butter or use very warm butter and spread on rolled up dough.  Lay down a thin layer of the nuts.  Sprinkle the desired amount of brown sugar and cinnamon and roll up. Seam side down in the pan!

Let the strudels rise for an hour or more – how long can you take it? 

Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.

Place strudels in middle rack of the oven and TURN DOWN HEAT TO 350

Bake for 20 minutes then rotate the pans in the over for even cooking.
Bake for an additional 20 minutes.  Check for doneness and remove from oven to a cooling rack.  Let cool for 20 minutes then remove from pans.  You may need to run a knife around the edge of the strudels to help them release.

Say a prayer of thanks to Grandma Margaret Dennis.  

Cool and eat.

Rick Dennis 
3/28/16